Now what you should also know is that by making one model soft deliverable in our case this was blog
post.
If it contains some relations there they are and may solve delectable by default.
And in this case they won't be deleted at all.
And this is because for example we have this deleting event commented out.
So this won't do anything to the comments so they will be readable using all the queries flung from
larval like they would normally exist but also if you old and command this fragment then when we will
try to delete a model then they would be permanently deleted from the database.
So since we have made blog posts self delete all we probably do not want this to happen with comments
so because otherwise if we would like to bring back our blog post it would be of course restored but
without any comments because they will be deleted.
So we should make comments.
Also self debatable.
So let's do that.
Let's run BJP artisan make migration art soft deletes two comments table so work quickly create our
migration for comments to also be solved delectable.
You should already know how to do that.
You only have to call self deletes in the app method for this table and then drop self deletes for the
down method and random migration.
So BGP artisan migrate.
Sorry I've misspelled the command peach bee artisan migrate.
OK this migrated and final step is too hard.
The self deletes trade inside the comment model and of course don't forget to import this class as visuals
to your code.
Did that import for me ultimately.
So now when we have the blog post model and it is listening to then deleting models so before the blog
post is being deleted it will first delete all the comments.
But this time they won't be removed permanently from the database.
They will also get the deleted art column said so they will stay in the database but they won't be visible
to the larval queries at least when you are not using with trashed.
Now students since we have changed that command stable then all the blog posts that we have previously
deleted won't have the comments.
Also solved.
Delete it.
There would be normally sitting inside the database so let and let's enlarge the terminal and run the
artisan tinker again.
Now what we will do is we will try to fetch our blog posts that have some comments since we do not want
to search for it manually.
We can use what we already know about the larval querying or eloquent querying specifically so to fetch
a blog post that has at least one comment we can use.
The static has method which will create an instance of the query builder.
So we are just querying for relationship existence.
So we already have a lecture about that.
If you don't don't remember I invite you to check that out.
So this would fetch us all the blog posts that have at least one comment.
So now we can use get and then first to just pick up the first model doesn't really matter which one
but it would have at least one comment.
So it happens to be our blog post with ideas 17.
In my case and now what we will do is we will delete this blog post remember that we have uncommitted
deleting events so it will self delete also all the comments.
So maybe I'll clear the screen so the variable was post and now our run delete on it it returns true
which means the blog post was deleted it.
Have it returned true so that means that the blog post was deleted.
Now let's go to the database and see what has happened.
So here is this post that the D 17.
It has a deleted art date.
Now let's go to comments
and find a blog.
Find the comments that have this blog post that I assigned to this blog post.
So it should be here in the blog posts ideal.
You can see that the comments with the blog post I.D. 17 also have deleted at date so they are also
self deleted and are not visible to the larval queries.
Now to actually restore this model we will have to restart Tinker so type peach bee artisan Tinker.
And now to fetch that model since it is being deleted we have to use blog post only trashed and then
find the blog post with Ida 17 you can see that the deleted art date is there.
Now let's clear this screen and you can run post restore to restore this particular blog post now you
can see that there is no deleted date and it should be fined.
It should be found by lava queries.
So let's go to the database and find our blog post with I.D. 17 or any other that you happened to find
when we are looking for any post with a comment.
So it doesn't have to have that I.D. 17.
Now let's go to comments and the comments for this blog post are on the next page.
And you can see that they are still self deleted.
They haven't been restored automatically.
And this is how it works in Lavell so it won't happen automatically.
You have to do that explicitly or manually.
So what we should do is we should subscribe to another event and it is called Restoring so we'll also
have the closure for this.
And what we will do here is when we are restoring a blog post you can also call blog posts comments
restore.
So this way you will restore all the blog posts or all the comments of this particular blog post.
And if your model has more relations and you'd like to self delete then let's say that comments might
have started that blog post might have comments or votes.
So you would want to delete them here and then you will also like to restore those to relations explicitly
in this particular place.
So we would also like to subscribe to that restoring event of the model that contains some additional
relations that you would like to be self deleted and then restart
now let's enlarge the terminal again.
So I will clear the screen and we'll run the tinker for the last time.
Now we'll also fetch a blog post.
May be the same one or anyway will fetch something with comments so we'll find post
something that has comments.
And we'll get the first element that has some comments.
Happens to be a blog post with I.D. 18.
In my case and now if you do not want to soft delete a model that is marked as soft delectable by the
trade you would like to permanently deleted from the database like non reversible.
Then you can do post force delete and what this will do is it will actually delete this blog post from
the database entirely.
Now if you will go to the blog posts table
you can see that there is no blog post with I.D. 18 so we have only with 17 and 19 and that I 18 was
permanently deleted.
Now if you will go to that comments table you can also see that they were deleted and you might understand
how it happened that we have deleted a blog post so larval instead of setting the deleted out they'd
have deleted the record entirely from the database.
But now how the comments were deleted.
So you might remember our migration when we have said the cascade for own delete event on the following
key.
So this time we have used the database configuration or database foreign key constraints and when the
record is deleted for this foreign key thanks to this fragment when the blog post or parent model is
deleted that this foreign key is referencing it also have deleted all the child references or the child
relations of this model.
So this is how old the comments were also permanently deleted from the database so of course when you
call forced delete on a model there is no coming back.
So it is being deleted permanently.